---
id: df37d6fb-33ac-4b34-bc21-3401db3aac52
title: Micropaleontological Formations
desc: Micropaleontology is the scientific study of microfossils, fossils that are microscopic in size and are not visible to the naked eye.
updated: 1620142543727
created: 1618502886244
title_de: Add a german title here
desc_de: Put a DE description of this note here...
author: FB
tao_type: story
cover_image: null
license: CC BY-SA
published: false
---

:::EN:::

Micropaleontology is the scientific study of microfossils, fossilized remains that are microscopic in size and are not visible to the naked eye. As the nature of this object of study suggests, the field is extremely diverse: microfossils can include anything, from a plethora of unicellular organisms with different biochemistries, to microscopic larvae, to pollens, seeds, and spores, or even to fragments of larger fossils, like teeth and scales. Furthermore, these different objects can be approached in a variety of ways: as organisms in themselves, as environmental indicators, as series in time, as geochemical materials, or as proxies for other geological, environmental or biological variables. The resulting diversity of micropaleontology makes it hard to trace one clear linear history of this discipline, which still struggles to find a unitary definition [^micropaleontology1]. For this reason, rather than talking about one unitary version of the formation of this discipline, this essay traces several formations, like geological strata constantly dynamic and transforming, to highlight how micropaleontology shapes our understanding of the planet in ways that are analogous to the very transformations it studies.

##Chaotic origins
Already since the earliest microscopic observations over the course of the 17th and 18th centuries, novel instruments and techniques allowed to catch increasingly clearer glimpses of unexpected and complex [[theme.microbial worlds]]. At first, the diversity of microbial life appeared chaotic and undefined, so much so that in 1767 [[material.carl linnaeus]] defined all microscopic organisms as what he named the _chaos infusorium_. But as the taxonomical ordering of the natural world proceeded rapidly especially during the 19th century, naturalists were faced with the task of making sense of this surprising diversity, which no longer appeared so chaotic, as recurring forms suggested there was order to these microorganisms, and stimulated the imagination of scientists. In this period, many attempted to describe and classify microbial organisms, collectively known as [[material.infusoria]], in ways that ran parallel to the taxonomic ordering of larger and more familiar life forms. But the tools and frameworks of early taxonomy proved ill-suited to the task: most early classifications were rapidly replaced and overturned, as the nature of microorganisms underwent significant transformations over the course of the 19th century, and well into the 20th - and still continues to surprise us today.

These early transformations in the understanding of microbial life had a deep impact on what was to become micropaleontology, as naturalists described impressive numbers of organisms, and gave them names which are often still in use according to the rules of taxonomical nomenclature [^micropaleontology2]. But while the traces of these workers are still prominent in species names, their organizations, classifications, and understandings of microbial life were often already discredited during their own lifetimes. This is the case of two figures often indicated as the 'fathers' of micropaleontology: [[material.alcide d'orbigny]] and [[material.christian gottfried ehrenberg]]. While d'Orbigny is credited with the first systematization and classification, in the 1820s, of [[material.foraminifera]] (which were later to become central to micropaleontology), his interpretations were not as succesful as his descriptive work. He believed them to be cephalopods, and even when he revised his interpretation, he continued to controversially argue that their diverse forms were the result of 27 separate creation events [^micropaleontology3]. Unlike d'Orbigny, Ehrenberg did not focus on a specific group, but he attended to the broader diversity of infusoria, publishing in 1838 his successful monograph _Die Infusionsthierchen als Vollkommene Organismen_. There, with the aid of detailed illustrations, he opposed the predominant hierarchical vision of taxonomy championed by Cuvier, which saw humans as the higher step of a [[material.scala naturae]], a natural, progressive, and hierarchical 'chain of beings' culminating in 'man'. Thanks to his early study of the formation of fungi from spores, he also resisted the widespread idea that 'lower animals' would originate spontaneously from inorganic matter, a theory known as [[material.spontaneous generation]].

In his desire to refute these understandings of life still common at the beginning of the 19th century, though, Ehrenberg argued that all infusoria were in fact 'complete' animals, and identified stomachs and other organs in his microscopic observations. This interpretation tainted his reputation, especially as he stubbornly refused to accept the evidence that disproved his observation for the rest of his life. For this reason, even if his second monograph, published in 1854, laid out much of the subject matter of micropaleontology under the name of _Mikrogeologie_, his work didn't have much impact until the following century. Despite the fame their detailed and rigorous descriptions won them, making them international authorities in their field, both d'Orbigny's and Ehrenberg's interpretations of microorganisms came under much criticism already during their lifetime. _What microbial organisms are_, had profoundly changed already by the 1850s [^micropaleontology4]. 

##Evolutionary dead ends
By the second half of the century, better observations - aided by significant improvements in [[story.microscopy]] after the 1830s (which led to the formulation of current [[story.cell theory]]), and the mounting evidence for the transmutation of organisms (that culminated in the 1850s with [[material.charles darwin]]'s and [[material.alfred russel wallace]]'s evolutionary theories), revolutionized the scientific understanding of nature. Despite these innovations, though, the characterization of microbial life and its role in the functioning of the planet and its history was still only beginning to take shape. While many naturalists took over the endeavour started by d'Orbigny and Ehrenberg of describing and classifying microbial diversity with the added intent to overcome the creationist positions of these 'founding fathers', these early attempts to connect microorganisms and the evolution of life on the planet met with what seemed to be a dead end. 

In the case of [[material.foraminifera]], this is evident in the work of [[material.william benjamin carpenter]], who in the 1860s rejected [[material.alcide d'orbigny]]'s systematization. Proposing a different interpretation of foraminiferans, he questioned the value of the notion of species for these organisms. Carpenter also authoritatively concluded that the great range of variation in this group was not representative of evolution into more complex forms, but instead indicated that they changed little over geological time. While dismissing the creationism of d'Orbigny, this view also legitimized the misconception that foraminifera were not useful in paleontology, as they supposedly remained essentially the same throughout the planet's history. In the same years, also [[material.radiolaria]] underwent a similar reclassification that was more attuned to the rise of evolutionism - and yet again failed to recognize the evolutionary depths of these microorganisms. [[material.ernst haeckel]], a young German naturalist, chose to concentrate his doctoral work on these organisms - until then mostly studied by Ehrenberg - with the goal of organizing them in a better 'natural system'. As he encountered the work of Darwin, Haeckel immediately became an ardent supporter, and introduced an evolutionary perspective in his successful radiolarian work. Even an enthusiast like Haeckel, though, eventually supported the view that these microorganisms changed little and slowly over geological time. This view was consolidated with the [[material.hms challenger]] expedition in the 1870s: the first comprehensive oceanographic survey of the world's oceans. As the scientists and crew of the expedition collected thousands of specimens, observations, and data, the foremost experts of the time were mobilized to analyse and report on the expedition's findings. 

Haeckel was charged with reporting on the radiolarians and [[material.henry bowman brady]] on the foraminiferans. Detailed, rigorous, and artfully illustrated, both reports enjoyed much success, as they represented the crowning achievement of 19th century natural sciences. Their encyclopedic work - together with that of the other scientists studying the challenger materials, still grounds much of subsequent [[story.oceanography]] and profoundly shaped our understanding of nature. But, while their descriptive value is still appreciated, both reports eventually reconfirmed the mistaken idea that microorganisms evolved only slowly and over long geological ranges. Even before being truly born, micropaleontology faced a premature death, as microfossils became disconnected from geological time in these early studies.

##Industrial micropaleontology
The break that would mark the success of micropaleontology was to come from an unexpected field of research, petroleum geosciences. Since the beginning of the 20th century, the use of [[material.fossil fuels]] had been growing exponentially, thanks to the success of the internal combustion engine, developments in transport, and oil's significant advantages over coal and steam. Yet, at the beginning of the century the methods for prospecting for oil were still rudimental and could not keep up with the increasing demand. To overcome this problem, oil companies had already been employing geologists since the end of the 19th century, who had successfully mobilized the 'anticlinal' theory to discover new wells. But after the first World War, faced with ever-growing demand, oil companies started to explore also regions in which more complex stratigraphies presented obstacles to geologists. Seeking a solution to their geological problems, the extractive industries hired paleontologists in the hope that they could help geologists trace oil fields more effectively. As we saw earlier, though, microfossils had been effectively declared useless for these types of problem, because of their assumed long evolutionary ranges, so early researchers focused on macrofossils to resolve these stratigraphical issues.

That is, until a consortium of US oil companies, which had moved to the Gulf coast after the privatization of Californian oil lands, hired three young women just out of college to work on their collection of fossils to solve stratigraphic troubles: [[material.esther applin]], [[material.alva ellisor]], and [[material.hedwig kniker]]. These young scientists were the first to identify, in 1921, the importance of fossil [[material.foraminifera]] in correlating and interpreting stratigraphies [^micropaleontology5]. Within three years from this breakthrough, 300 micropaleontologists were employed in the industry, and by 1931 more than three quarters of all US oil wells used micropaleontologists. This discovery single-handedly revolutionized the oil industry and geology, bringing what came to be known as _industrial micropaleontology_ to the fore: micropaleontology came to be identified with the new tool of [[material.biostratigraphy]]. Capitalizing on this technoscientific development, one of the foremost expert on foraminifera at the time, [[material.joseph cushman]], used the profit of his work as a consultant for oil companies to open the Cushman laboratory, still today one of the most important sites for the study of foraminiferal micropaleontology [^micropaleontology6]. Others followed in his footsteps, as new generations of micropaleontologists needed to be trained for the needs of the extractive industries.

The example of US industrial micropaleontology was quickly followed all over the world. For instance, in the Soviet Union, where the exploitation of the Baku oilfield had already stimulated similar work, a micropaleontology institute was established in 1930 as part of the Petroleum Geological Prospecting
Institute (VNIGRI) in Leningrad. Under the leadership of [[material.alexander vasilievich fursenko]] and later of [[material.nina nicolaevna subbotina]], the institute also developed important research in industrial micropaleontology. It also extended its activities to Moscow, where [[material.dagmara maksimilianovna rauser-chernousova]] lead the discovery of more important oilfields in Baku during the second World War [^micropaleontology7]. In this sense, the field of micropaleontology was largely formed not to answer academic and scientific questions, but as an applied instrument to address geological and stratigraphic problems, in particular in relation to the extractive industries' search for [[material.fossil fuels]]. This history of a scientific discipline, then, is also intertwined with the private and national concerns that developed alongside global oil interests, industries, and logistics - in particular in the formative early years of the 20th century. As two World Wars ravaged, fragmented, and reassembled planetary orders, industrial micropaleontology's importance grew alongside with the rise of the use of fossil fuels - and the increasing concentration of economic power in the hands of oil companies.

##Micropaleontology at sea
As the global conflicts of the first half of the 20th century only increased society's thirst for fossil fuels, industrial micropaleontology continued its rise to fame. But, at least until the end of the second Wold War, the efforts of micropaleontologists had concentrated almost exclusively on foraminifera, and the understanding of earth's complex dynamics was still taking shape. As oil became more profitable, a better knowledge of global stratigraphy was increasingly necessary. In this context, the work of [[material.william rex riedel]], and his reassessment of [[material.radiolaria]] species ranges, represented a pivotal point in the histoy of micropaleontology. Encouraged by his supervisor, as a graduate student Riedel started focusing on this group, which had largely been neglected since the end of the 19th century. Analysing more closely the material studied by [[material.ernst haeckel]] from the [[material.hms challenger]] expedition, Riedel noticed that the German naturalist often didn't correctly discriminate between older fossils and more recent materials. Rather than presenting long ranging forms, he realized that radiolarian species could also be used in [[material.biostratigraphy]], since their changes over time also offer helpful tools to interpret geological formations and their relations.

After the earlier, less successful, experience of micropaleontology at sea, which by the end of the 19th century had lead scientists to misinterpret the role of microfossils, micropaleontologists were to become more deeply entangled with [[story.oceanography]] once again. Riedel's work exemplifies well this connection and its formative impact in micropaleontology. Visiting Sweden in 1950, Riedel worked with [[material.borje kullenberg]] and assisted him in studying the deep sediment cores from the [[material.albatross expedition]]. Thanks to the [[material.piston corer]] developed by Kullenberg, it was now possible to collect longer continuous cores at depth - an innovation that profoundly impacted [[story.oceanography]]. This and other technological innovations that had been developed in wartime, like the [[material.radar]], the [[material.sonar]], and other novel sounding and sampling techniques, facilitated impressive strides in the study, understanding, and exploration of the global ocean. When Riedel, in 1951, moved to the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California, he helped bringing [[material.radiolaria]] and micropaleontology to the forefront of postwar oceanography, as he became a key figure in this field. In particular, he was instrumental to the early establishment of [[material.deep sea drilling]] and its success, as he championed both the technical and the scientific interests at stake in this effort: collecting cores of sediments thoughout the oceans promised to provide vast and useful data, and shed light on the deeper and less visible processes shaping our planet. Microfossils had a leading role in this, since they provided the keys to understand stratigraphic histories, but also, increasingly, other physicochemical aspects of what was increasingly understood as a complex and deeply interconnected [[material.system sciences]]. The unprecedented amount of information that could be gathered by deep sea drilling expeditions became a fundamental part of postwar [[material.big science]], laying the foundations for today [[material.big data]] - and making micropaleontology even more central.

As this field began to venture further at sea in the postwar period, it also underwent other important transformations, which reached beyond the simple taxonomical and systematic aspect of microfossils and increased their scientific value by combining [[material.biostratigraphy]] to innovations in [[material.geochemistry]]. This field was booming in their aftermath of the second global conflict: as the study of [[material.nuclear physics]] increasingly converged with the developments in chemistry that continued since the 19th century, the understanding of geological processes radically transformed. This fertile interdisciplinary synergy simultaneously depended on and made possible other technical innovations, like mass [[material.spectrometry]] and the applied use of [[material.isotopes]] boosted by the atomic age. In micropaleontology, the central role of geochemistry and its connection with nuclear physics is well illustrated in the important contributions of [[material.cesare emiliani]]. In the 1950s, Emiliani was working at the Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Science, as a research associate in the geochemical laboratory of [[material.harold urey]] - who was pioneering the study of the relationships between stable isotopes and environmental variables. Applying these insights to [[material.foraminifera]], Emiliani was able to relate changes in oxygen isotopes in the microfossils with changes in ocean temperatures: the microfossil record accumulated on the bottom of the sea, he demonstrated, could work as a [[material.paleothermometer]], since it registered environmental changes withing the microorganisms' biochemistry. Thanks to these technological and conceptual transformations, industrial micropaleontology consolidated its importance not only as an applied aspect of the extractive industries, but also - increasingly - as a foundational tool in the study of the planet's dynamics and history. As the examples of both Riedel and Emiliani illustrate, this novel role of micropaleontology was especially and increasingly associated with [[story.oceanography]] and its deepening connection with [[material.system sciences]], which were part of a deeper transformation and adjustment of the landscape of scientific knowledge production.

##Of microbes and planets
Building on the success of industrial micropaleontology, the reorganization of this field in the postwar period was also part of broader changes that had already begun to radically tranform the sciences since the second World War. This transformation, usually characterized as the advent of [[material.big science]], is well examplified by the field of science that was to become a model for all other discipline:  [[material.nuclear physics]]. In fact, the increasingly large investments required for technoscientific projects, combined with the growing involvement of national governments and military funding and administration that characterized the famous Manhattan Project - which developed the atom bomb for the USA - were to become staples of postwar science. 

[[theme.planetary data]], [[material.NSB]], [[material.cycladophora davisiana]], [[material.big science]], [[material.big data]], [[material.gaia theory]]

[^micropaleontology1]: This is clear in the title of an important article in this field from the 1980s: Lipps, Jere H. "What, If Anything, Is Micropaleontology?" _Paleobiology_ 7, no. 2 (1981): 167-99. Accessed April 20, 2021. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2400472. And in a more recent reprise: Martin, Ronald E. "What, if anything, is environmental micropaleontology?." _Microbiology_ 1 (2004): 1-10.
[^micropaleontology2]: The impact of these early descriptions is quantified in Lazarus, David. "The legacy of early radiolarian taxonomists, with a focus on the species published by early German workers." _Journal of Micropalaeontology_ 33, no. 1 (2014): 3-19.
[^micropaleontology3]: This argument is clearly laid out in Orbigny, Alcide Dessalines d'. _Foraminifères fossiles du bassin tertiaire de Vienne (Autriche)_. Paris: Gide et Compe. (1846). https://doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.145432
[^micropaleontology4]: See, for instance, Churchill, Frederick B. "The guts of the matter. Infusoria from Ehrenberg to Bütschli: 1838–1876." _Journal of the History of Biology_ 22, no. 2 (1989): 189-213. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00139512
[^micropaleontology5]: This history is told in detail in Gries, Robbie Rice. "How female geologists were written out of history: the micropaleontology breakthrough." _Geological Society of America Memoirs_ 214 (2018): 11-22. https://doi.org/10.1130/2018.1214(02)
[^micropaleontology6]: Some important aspects of the history of this laboratory are narrated on the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History's website: https://naturalhistory.si.edu/research/paleobiology/collections-overview/foraminifera-collections/joseph-cushman.
[^micropaleontology7]: For the history of Soviet micropaleonotlogy: Mikhalevich, Valeria & Bugrova, Eleonora & Basov, Valeriy & Zakrevskaya, Elena & Dmitrieva, Tatiana & Barash, Max.  "The Russian School of Foraminiferology." _The Journal of Foraminiferal Research_ 50 (2020): 97-107. https://doi.org/10.2113/gsjfr.50.1.97. And: Yakovleva‐O'Neill, Svetlana P., and Genrieta E. Kolzova. "A history of the first micropalaeontological laboratory in the former Soviet Union." Landmarks in _Foraminiferal Micropalaeontology: History and Development_, The Micropalaeontological Society, Special Publications (2013): 59-66. https://doi.org/10.1144/TMS6.6



:::DE:::

German content goes here.
