---
id: 5e690cd2-1cfc-4d1e-9f1b-d1bb33f0b064
title: Taxonomical orders
desc: In biology, taxonomy is a formal system to name, define, and classify organisms, regulated and governed by agreed upon rules
updated: 1619623501180
created: 1618491191119
title_de: Add a german title here
desc_de: Put a DE description of this note here...
author: FB
tao_type: theme
cover_image: null
license: CC BY-SA
published: false
---

:::EN:::

Taxonomy (from the Greek _taxis_, order, and _nomos_, law) refers to ways to classify and categorize reality. Broadly, then, taxonomies can be found anywhere and can refer to any sort of thing; but **in biology,** taxonomy has come to refer to a specific system for ordering and classifying all forms of life. In this narrower biological sense, **taxonomy is a formal system to name, define, and classify groups of organisms, regulated and governed by agreed upon rules**, communities of experts, and by international scientific institutions.

This formal system has its origins in the work of Carl Linnaeus, in the 18th century. Like many other early naturalists, Linnaeus intended to build a classification that could encompass all of God’s creatures. While he did imagine some of the categories he identified as natural classes, his system was consciously an artificial one – designed with practical concerns in mind. In particular, he introduced the standard ranks of kingdom, class, order, genus, and species, and another important standard, binomial nomenclature – the use of two Latin names to define species. Thanks to these features, and to Linnaeus’ own vast compilatory work, his system had an enormous success – and it is still in current use, at least in some crucial formal respects. In fact, two different books published by Linnaeus are officially considered the starting point of contemporary botanical and zoological taxonomy, the 1753 _Species Plantarum_, and the 10th edition of the _Systema Naturae_ published in 1758, respectively.

Despite the success of the Linnaean system, already **since its beginning biological taxonomy was neither stable nor universal, since controversies emerged, and classifications continue to change still today.** For instance, the traditions of botany and zoology began to diverge already with Linnaeus, resulting in two different codes regulating animal and plant nomenclatures – respectively, the _International Code of Zoological Nomenclature_, and what used to be the botanical code. But organisms that did not fit the Linnaean ranks began to be described – especially in the 20th century, as fungi, protists, and other (often microscopic) groups of life forms were identified, complicating even more the regulation of taxonomic nomenclature. This turned the botanical code into the _International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants_, and led to the _International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria_ and the _International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses_ developed after the 1960s.

Despite their early divergence, though, both plants and animal systematics went through a significant shared transformation over the course of the 19th century, which radically transformed taxonomy. From artificial schemes to classify an otherwise disordered nature, some of the differences these systems identified began emerging as natural. Furthermore, as ranks were often presented graphically as trees (dendrograms), the idea of taxonomical differences as evidence of the natural transmutation of species became increasingly popular. By the end of the 1850s, as [[material.charles darwin]] and [[material.alfred russel wallace]] presented their theories about the origin of species, the classification of organisms started representing relations of descent within the scope of the emerging theory of evolution by natural selection. **From an order based on explicitly artificial categories, taxonomy increasingly became understood as a natural system, grounded in evolutionary change.**

This transformation of taxonomy is well represented in Ernst Haeckel’s illustration of the evolutionary relations of descent connecting all of life, published in 1866, in his _Generelle Morphologie der Organismen_. With it, Haeckel also introduced a successful new rank, that of phylum, an intermediary between kingdom and class. However, the tension between a purely morphological or descriptive concern with taxonomy, and an evolutionary and phylogenetic interest for natural classes, was never solved once and for all. This tension is somewhat reflected in the distinction between alpha and beta taxonomy that emerged in the beginning of the 20th century – the first supposedly concerned with the description of taxa, and the second with higher ranks and broader questions. This distinction continues to highlight an implicit tension between natural history’s systematic effort to catalogue all of nature, and evolutionary biology’s desire to characterize the relation of descent of all living things. Even the Modern Evolutionary Synthesis, that began surfacing in the 1950s to reconcile Darwinian evolutionary theory and Mendelian genetics, did not manage to stabilize a universal approach to taxonomy.

Even as molecular and computational biology came to revolutionize the life sciences especially since the 1980s, taxonomy failed to be fully standardized. Cladistics came to dominate the classificatory effort, but the nomenclature code specifically developed for this approach – _PhyloCode_ – is far from replacing the various other codes in existence. **As a practical tool for scientists, taxonomy continues to include a number of different approaches, traditions, and concerns**, which are reflected in the variety of taxonomical orders used by different parts of the scientific community. In fact, many scientists prefer to use particular taxonomies that fit their specialized interests, rather than attempting a holistic and universalist compilation. **More than a conceptual synthesis, what seems to be effective in bringing together diverging taxonomical orders and resolving (or by-passing) ongoing controversies have been pragmatic tools, like digital databases**. Allowing for easier access, arguably more democratic community participation, and, importantly, more standardization, precision, and computational volume, digital databases have proliferated. The _Encyclopedia of Life_, the _Global Biodiversity Information Facility_, the _NCBI taxonomy database_, the _Open Tree of Life_, and the _Catalogue of Life_ are only some of the most significant databases; the more they are used, the more successful and established they become – in a positive feedback that is transforming taxonomy’s practices. These digital resources for biological taxonomy help scientists who might not always have the opportunity to keep up with ever-expanding and changing classifications, and as such can be said to have revolutionized taxonomy. Yet, privileging computational and statistical approaches, databases have also been criticized for further endangering the already threatened taxonomical expertise. To counter this tendency, taxonomers collaborate and experiment with methods to preserve taxonomical knowledge, for instance through initiatives like the _European Distributed Institute of Taxonomy_, but also by engaging in the design and management of data infrastructures. 

Like all sorts of classifications, biological taxonomies are entangled with power: the power to define categories and who does and does not belong, as well as the power to enforce these orders. In this sense, **taxonomical orders are never neutral and purely technical classifications, but they have significant real-life consequences**. This is particular evident in the contemporary articulation of the technocratic governmentality emerging around climate change and the pressing need for quantifying and managing biodiversity loss. As different approaches to taxonomy can result in different interpretations of data, different thresholds, and hence different policies to handle environmental problems, the ordering practices of taxonomy promise to have an important role in how we will manage to navigate the challenges offered by a transforming planet.

<!-- Maybe here we should add something more on the power involved in taxonomical orders... like how they still perpetuate colonial legacies, how they are rarely thought of as political and so on... -->

:::DE:::

German content goes here.
